We've entered the age of agentic AI
systems that don't just think, but they
also act. Agents can talk to APIs. They
can call tools. They can buy things.
They can move data. Even create sub
agents. But every new capability adds a
new attack surface. Yet another way the
bad guys can get into our systems. So
how do we protect this new ecosystem? We
bring zero trust. Never trust. Always
verify.
I know, I know you've heard about zero
trust before. Isn't that just a
marketing slogan that all the vendors
used and abused in order to get us to
buy whatever they had on the truck?
Well, yes and no. Definitely the term
got hijacked by overzealous sellers
trying to meet their quotas. But I'm a
cyber security architect and I never got
confused by all that noise because I
knew there were some solid, even
game-changing security principles worth
holding on to. And now that we have AI
agents popping up everywhere, the time
is right to dust off the hype and
repurpose the good in zero trust in
order to face the current security
challenge. Okay, let's take a quick
review of what zero trust principles
are. What distinguishes zero trust from
doing things in a nonzero trust way.
Well, one of the simple things that I
mentioned previously is you verify and
then you trust. So you only trust
something that has in fact been verified
or trust follows verification is another
way to think of it. Another thing is we
get rid of the just in case principle
where we put things out in case we need
them and replace it with just in time.
So we give the access rights that are
needed only when they're needed and not
for longer than they're needed. That's a
preserving of the principle of lease
privilege which says you have only the
access rights that you need for only as
long as you need them and not longer.
Another thing is we move from
perimeterbased controls where we're
trying to basically put the hard crunchy
outside and leave the soft chewy center.
That's not very good. In fact, what we
want to move to is a more pervasive set
of security controls. So the security
controls are throughout the system not
just around the outside. And then what I
think is the most important aspect and
it often gets overlooked in zero trust
discussions is the idea of the
assumption of breach. You assume the bad
guy is already in your system already in
your network already in your database in
your application already has elevated
privileges from stolen credentials.
That's what we're going to operate from.
Now design your security. So it's
assuming that you've been breached
already and it's a very different model,
a very different paradigm and way of
thinking about security. So let's take a
look and see what zero trust principles
would look like if they were applied to
an agentic environment. First of all,
let's look at a traditional environment.
How do we apply zero trust in this case?
Well, we've got users that have to be
secured. They're part of the security
equation. So I need to do identity and
access management. I need to make sure
that the user has an account, that
they're logged in, that the person
logged in is in fact the user they claim
to be. So that's strong authentication,
access controls, so that they can only
access the things that they're permitted
to see. The device that the user is
using matters as well. It could be
compromised. I need to make sure that it
is in fact pure, that it hasn't been
jailbroken, that an attacker hasn't
taken control of the system because then
it won't matter if I have the authentic
user trying to do the right thing if the
device has already been compromised. I
need to look at the data layer of all of
this. So, I need to make sure that the
data that's sensitive has been encrypted
so it can't be easily seen. I need to
make sure that it's not leaving my
network if it's not supposed to. Things
like that. And then another big part and
a lot of people start their zerorust
discussions in this particular area and
it's the area of the network. So I'm
going to make sure that my network is
well secured that if information is
traversing a part and that information
is sensitive then I want to have it
encrypted. I want to make sure that I do
things like micro segmentation where I
group individual parts of the network
together and give some level of
isolation so that if this guy gets
infected, his infection doesn't easily
spread to others. So those are some of
the things that we've done traditionally
in zero trust and spreading this
pervasively throughout the system. I've
got to do all of that as I move into the
agentic world plus I have to do some
more. So as we start looking at agents,
who are the actors? The actors are in
fact software. So we've got an AI agent
here that is
using a nonhuman identity. So here we
had users and we could associate them
with the identity they were using. But
an agent may in fact use lots of these
different NHIS, lots of different
non-human identities. So here we have a
proliferation of these things growing. I
need to make sure all of them have the
same level of control and visibility
that we had for the human users. In
fact, maybe even more because they're
operating autonomously and we need
supervision of that. We need tools that
we're going to be using to also be
secure. We need to make sure that the
tools that we're leveraging are tools we
can trust. Again, we have data. In this
case, data may be the thing that was the
basis for the AI agent. We use data to
train the model. We need to also augment
the model. We may use preference
information and other context
information that we put into the model.
I need to make sure all of that stuff
has been secured, that it hasn't been
tampered with. And then ultimately, I
need to be able to look at the
intentions of the agent and make sure
those intentions match what the original
user's intentions were for this
particular system. Let's take a look at
an agentic system and see where the
threats might be. So here is how the
thing basically works. We have a sensing
portion that is the thing that takes the
input. It might be visual, it might be
textual, it could be a lot of different
things but that feeds into the AI which
does the thinking and then in that
thinking we will augment that with
policies, preferences and other things
like that. So we'll have that
information affecting the thought
process, the reasoning process that's
happening and then ultimately it takes
those actions. So it could do an API
call, it might uh write some data, move
some data around, it might use a tool,
it might spawn other agents. And then
all of this is going to be driven by
credentials. So we have individual
capabilities that each one of these
things ought to be able to have. So, if
I'm an attacker, I look at this thing
and start to figure how might I break
this thing? Well, one thing I could do
right here is a direct prompt injection.
I might send a prompt in that is going
to break the context of this system and
have it start doing things that it's not
supposed to do. So, that's one of the
things I could think about. Another is I
could attack right here and I could do
something to manipulate to to mess up
the policy the preference information to
poison that information or even poison
the model that was used to train this
thing. So that's another one to look at.
Another thing here is looking at all of
these interfaces. What if I insert
myself at any one of these? that would
be uh a place where I could do some
damage if on this and this might be say
an MCP call something along those lines.
Um and I would be able to insert and
take control of that. I might also
attack individuals of these services,
these APIs, the data source, the tools,
uh the agents. So all of those are an
extension of the attack surface. And
then right here they're credentials.
Maybe I want to go in and attack those.
Maybe I can copy those credentials.
Maybe I can log into a system and create
new accounts or increase my level of
privilege. So there's a lot of different
moving parts in this system. An attacker
has a wealth of different places that
they could in fact dive into and do a
lot of damage. So now let's apply those
zero trust principles to this AI agentic
environment and we'll see what we can do
to eliminate some or all of these
threats. So first of all, we're going to
start here with the credentials. And I
mentioned this before, we want unique
credentials for every agent, for every
user, and every agent that those agents
create as well. So, we need a place to
store all of these nonhuman identities
and keep all of them access controlled.
Keep them so that they don't have more
privilege than they're supposed to have.
We want it to be just in time, not just
in case. In other words, we give the
privilege just when it's needed and then
we take it away. We don't give it in
advance and say, "Well, just in case you
might need this later." So, we're going
to do that. We're going to make sure
that these systems also never include
credentials buried into the system
itself. And that's been a temptation of
programmers. They put a a password, they
put an API key, and they bet it direct
embed it directly into their code. That
is an absolute no no. What we want
instead is to store all of these in a
vault where we have a dynamic system
where I can go check credentials in and
out. I can get new credentials created
over time. I can enforce just in time. I
can enforce RO based access control. I
can do strong authentication. I can do
all of those kinds of things that I'm
needing to do in these cases. So, we're
going to uh cover all of those bases. No
static credentials. everything is
dynamic instead. And then we're going to
move over to the tools themselves. So I
need to make sure that these things have
registered versions. So I'm going to
have a tool registry where I have
verified these are secure APIs that we
can afford to use. The others have not
been vetted. These are a set of secure
databases and data sources that we can
use. These are a set of tools that we
have vetted and we can trust. And all of
these kinds of things, if we're going to
be using those, it's basically, think
about if you're making a cake or a soup,
you want to make sure that the
ingredients that go into it are pure.
So, we want to make sure that we're
using the pure stuff to begin with.
Then, I need something that's going to
give me some sort of inspection over the
whole thing. So something that's going
to be able to look over it all, look
here and see if there are improper
inputs going into any of these tools
that are coming out of the agent. Also
be able to look and check for these
prompt injections that may be coming
into the system. We could use an AI
firewall or an AI gateway, whichever
term you prefer, to do those sort of
checks and block. So it will look and
see, is that something that should be
allowed to go in? Do we have information
leaking out of systems that shouldn't
be? Are we making improper calls? This
sort of thing. So, it's an enforcement
layer here as well. And then ultimately,
I need to be able to have traceability
of all of this. So, I need a system
where I'm logging immutable logs. That
means that they can't be changed. I
don't want a bad guy to come in here and
change the information that's in my log.
I want to be able to prevent that. So,
when actions are occurring in the
system, it needs to be able to be
traceable. so we can go back later and
understand why it did what it did. I
also want to scan the entire
environment, be able to look across all
of these different things. And we've got
different tools for different types of
scanning. We've got network scanning
tools. We've got endpoint scanning
tools. We've got tools now that can scan
AI models and look for vulnerabilities
that may be latent and hiding inside of
those. Ultimately, at the end of all
this, we need still a human in the loop.
We need an ability to be able to have a
kill switch. If someone sees this thing
is running out of control, what it's
doing is not right and we can go see
what it's been doing, we want to put
throttles in place in some cases so that
if maybe it's a buying application, it
doesn't just suddenly decide, hey, I
like this. I'm going to buy a thousand
of these in a minute. Maybe we don't
want it to do that. So, we throttle back
its activity. We have canary deployments
where we sort of drop the canary in the
coal mine to see what happens. So we're
going to see if this system dropped into
an environment is going to operate
properly or not. A lot of different
things you can see here. The agent
systems are complex. The number of
threats that we face are complex and
numerous. So our security defenses have
to be up to the challenge. Agentic AI
multiplies power
and risk. Zero trust gives us the
framework to keep that power contained.
Every agent must prove who it is,
justify what it wants, and earn trust
continuously. As we move forward with
autonomous systems, zero trust
principles deployed correctly serve as
guard rails that keep innovation in
alignment with our intent instead of the
bad guys.